{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2709
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid102\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid202\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid302\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid402\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid502\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid602\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid7}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13440\viewh7240\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Introduction
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
Hello! This document contains important information about the code used for data analysis for the \'93Reproductive stages in low bush blueberry (
\f2\i Vaccinium angustifolium
\f1\i0 ) occur earlier with increasing temperature\'94 paper. The code follows the steps provided in the statistical analysis section of the paper. Please start at folder one (1 - Initial Data Cleaning) and proceed to folder two (2 - Removing Outliers), etc.  All code was created in R 4.4.1 and run in Rstudio 2024.04.2+764. \
\

\f0\b \ul Notes
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f1 	}Fruit post-veraison and seed disperse are synonymous. Fruit post-veraison was used in the paper but seed disperse was used in the code.\
{\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f1 	}Ecoregion and ecozone are synonymous. Ecoregion was used in the paper but ecozone was used in the code.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \

\f0\b \ul Folders
\f1\b0 \ulnone :\
1 - Initial Data Cleaning: \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Contains the original data from the E. C. Smith herbarium, online herbariums, and iNaturalist. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Cleans and merges the original data into an initial dataset (1448 observations). \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
2 - Removing Outliers: \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Removes observations dates more than two standard deviations away from the mean date for each phenological stage.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Removes observations scored as vegetation only.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Removes one observation from northern Quebec.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Provides a clean dataset (1152 observations).\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
3 - Adding Temperature Data:\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Adds temperature data for March, April, May, June, July, August, and September.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Removes any observations without temperature data.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Contains the unzipped CRU TS v4.08 data.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Creates a new dataset with temperature data added (929 observations).\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
4 - Adding Ecoregions:\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Adds ecoregion information for each observation.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Removes one observation whose ecoregion is marked as \'93WATER\'94.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Contains the US EPA Level 2 ecoregion shape file. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Generates the final dataset used for the models, figure creation, and table creation (928 observations).\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
5 - Running The Models:\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls6\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Contains code to run EQ1 (LMMs for temperature phenology models).\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Contains code to generate Cp plots.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Contains code to run EQ2 (LMs for temperature phenology models).\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Contains code to run EQ3 (LMMs for time phenology models).\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
6 - Creating Figures And Tables:\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls7\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Contains code to generate figures 1, 2, 3, and 4.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Contains code to obtain the values for tables 1 and 2.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\

\f0\b \ul 1 - Initial Data Cleaning files:
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
angustifolium_photodata.xlsx: original iNaturalist data. \
\
ECSmithHerbariumAccessions_PhenologyScoring.xlsx: original E. C. Smith herbarium data. \
\
filtered_blueberry_data (1).xlsx: original online herbarium data. \
\
Initial_Data_Cleaning.R: Cleans and merges the original datasets into initial_data.csv.\
\
initial_data.csv: Three original datasets cleaned and merged together. Created by Initial_Data_Cleaning.R. Contains 1448 observations.\
\
\
\

\f0\b \ul 2 - Removing Outliers files:
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
clean_data.csv: Merged data with outliers removed. Created by Removing_Outliers.R. Contains 1152 observations.\
\
gadm: Contains the information needed to create the map of North America. Used to look as the odd observation in Quebec. \
\
Great Lakes: Contains the information needed to add the Great Lakes to the map. Used to look a the odd observation in Quebec.\
\
initial_data.csv: Three original datasets cleaned and merged together. Created by Initial_Data_Cleaning.R. Contains 1448 observations.\
\
Removing_Outliers.R: Removes observations dates more than two standard deviations away from the mean date for each phenological stage. Removes observations scored as vegetation only. Removes one observation from northern Quebec. Creates clean_data.csv.\
\
\
\

\f0\b \ul 3 - Adding Temperature Data files:
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
Add_Temperature_Data.R: Adds temperature data for March, April, May, June, July, August, and September. Removes any observations without temperature data. Creates vaccinium_with_weather_data_clean.csv.\
\
clean_data.csv: Merged data without outliers. Created by Removing_Outliers.R. Contains 1152 observations.\
\
cruts4.08.1901.2023.tmp.dat.nc: Unzipped CRU TS v4.08 dataset. Downloaded from: https://crudata.uea.ac.uk/cru/data/hrg/cru_ts_4.08/cruts.2406270035.v4.08/tmp/. If data is redownload you will need to unzip it with the gunzip function from the R.utils package.\
\
vaccinium_with_weather_data_clean.csv: Merged data with temperature data and with outliers removed. Created by Add_Temperature_Data.R. Contains 929 observations.\
\
\
\

\f0\b \ul 4 - Adding Ecoregions files:
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
Add_Ecoregion_Data.R: Adds ecoregion information for each observation. Removes one observation whose ecoregion is marked as \'93WATER\'94. Creates vaccinium_with_zones_weather_clean.csv.\
\
Eco_Level2: United States Environmental Protection Agency Level 2 ecoregions data. Downloaded from: https://www.epa.gov/eco-research/ecoregions-north-america \
\
vaccinium_with_weather_data_clean.csv: Merged data with temperature data and without outliers. Created by Add_Temperature_Data.R. Contains 929 observations.\
\
vaccinium_with_zones_weather_clean.csv: The final dataset used for the models and figure/table creation. Contains the merged data with temperatures and ecoregion data added with outliers removed. Created by Add_Ecoregion_data.R.\
\
\
\

\f0\b \ul 5 - Running The Models files:
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
Create_Cp_Plots.R: Creates a Cp plot for each phenology stage for the LMs looking at temperature-phenology relationships. \
\
EQ1_LMMs_Temp_Phenology.R: Contains the code to run the LMMs looking at temperature-phenology relationships for each phenology stage. Aligns with equation one in the paper. \
\
EQ2_LMs_Temp_Phenology.R: Contains the code to run the LMs looking at temperature-phenology relationships for each phenology stage. Aligns with equation two in the paper. \
\
EQ3_LMMs_Time_Phenology.R: Contains the code to run the LMMs looking at time-phenology relationships for each phenology stage. Aligns with equation three in the paper. \
\
vaccinium_with_zones_weather_clean.csv: The final dataset used for the models and figure/table creation. Contains the merged data with temperatures and ecoregion data added with outliers removed. Created by Add_Ecoregion_data.R.\
\
\
\

\f0\b \ul 6 - Creating Figures And Tables files:
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
Figure_1.R: Contains the code to create figure 1. \
\
Figure_2.R: Contains the code to create figure 2. \
\
Figure_3.R: Contains the code to create figure 3. \
\
Figure_4.R: Contains the code to create figure 4. \
\
gadm: Contains the information needed to create the map of North America for figure 1.\
\
Great Lakes: Contains the information needed to add the Great Lakes to the map of North America for figure 1.\
\
Table_1.R: Contains the code to generate the values for table 1.\
\
Table_2.R: Contains the code to generate the values for table 2.\
\
vaccinium_with_zones_weather_clean.csv: The final dataset used for the models and figure/table creation. Contains the merged data with temperatures and ecoregion data added with outliers removed. Created by Add_Ecoregion_data.R.\
\
\
}